# 4. More Advanced Stuff

Now that you know how to use if-statements, loops, arrays, and hashes, you can
write single programs that solve almost any simple problem. You've still got
quite a bit to learn, though, before you can write clean and efficient programs
that accomplish anything you might want. In fact, every single program that
exists can be expressed as some combination of loops, if-statements, and
variable manipulations (hashes and arrays make this a lot easier).

The following sections will bridge the gap between what you've learned so far
and what you'll need to know when we start working on web application
development with Ruby.

Study here is a bit harder to parcel out, but in general, you'll want to:

- Refer to Chris Pine's book - Use the [*Learn Ruby the Hard Way*
exercises](http://learnrubythehardway.org/book/) 
- Do the exercises on
[codecademy in the Ruby strain](http://www.codecademy.com/tracks/ruby) 
- CodeSchool's [*Try Ruby*](https://www.codeschool.com/courses/try-ruby) course 
- CodeSchool's [*Ruby Bits*](https://www.codeschool.com/courses/ruby-bits) course

Our assumption is that, coming into class, you'll be pretty comfortable with
material up to this point and sort of familiar with material after this point.
Much of what's below (writing good methods, object oriented programming, and
even blocks) takes some time to really get a feel for, and getting really good
requires that you spend a decent amount of time over several months, sometimes
several years. Computer science and programming are both very young fields,
relatively speaking, and both have evolved so quickly that no one is yet
completely sure of the best way to write software. Instead, we've just got a
bunch of techniques that generally make life easier for us.

Don't let this scare you, and also be kind to yourself as you go through this
last section.

